# On Work: A sketch of a map

## Internet
Both as a work field in itself & as a tool to work *with* (or *through*, instead of just *on*)
+
taking Internet for granted, as a necessary thing of everyday life (cfr. implications in life and work-related environment in which Internet has become a necessity, so contingent to life itself—not just in the western world—if you want to keep up with society)

## Work/Labour
(*there is a difference, I know*)

More and more it has become free and cheap labour, resembling almost a sort of voluntarism and other times a gift, an act of gift-making—asking no more a retribution (or there is one, just *exposure*)

Turning the paradigm from:
* Working and (to) get money, but getting few or no money
to
* Working as a form of gift-giving/voluntarism [^1]

[^1] What’s the difference and how these two differ from slavery?

## Gift

As a radical shift *in* the relation/*towards* the relation between the internet and labour:
* Skipping altogether the struggle for a wage?
* Being paid in a different way? (e.g. not waiting to receive something back from the person you gave something but being part of a circle of people in which then someone else will give you something—out of the blue, not to exactly repay you of what you did last time
* Does this destabilise or reinforce the Capital?

* * *

## Questions

* What are the maintenance jobs on the internet?
(cfr. Silvia Federici’s “Wages against housework”)
* How do they fit in the general functioning of the internet machine?
* What’s the value and weight of the gift & voluntarism in this kind of work?
* Can and why should they be acknowledged within the sphere of work and of the internet?

## Being a user of wikipedia

* Wikipedia as an example of “expected to be on the internet” service and at the same time one which needs tons of (invisible) maintenance work (labour)
* User becomes a political subject as soon as she has the possibility to interact with the informations present on the website and these involves a general knowledge of the world (from history to biology, to art to geography to a tv series)
* Publishing and reviewing what has been published

* What’s the user culture of wikipedia?