# Designing Democracy, research theme
## notes

On *work*:
* Italy as a democratic republic, founded on the principle that work is an essential right to its citizens, in order to have a life (being autonomous, etc.).
*→cfr. Article n° 1 of the Italian Constitution*

* Internet was conceived by its creators as a democratic tool: anyone can publish their own content and read someone else’s content, from text to images, audio and videos.
*→look up for source: Tim Berners-Lee*

* More and more, having some leisure time on or through the internet, or simply keeping in touch with other people (loved ones, friends, etc.), is not merely a simple act such it would seem, but it implies something more: it’s becoming a form of invisible labour in service of the big companies who offer such services (usually for free).
*→ 1) Immaterial Labour (Maurizio Lazzaretto); 2) facebook, google and twitter a form of work, in order to receive tailored-made ads without knowing it (The New Inquiry, Rob Horning)*

* If every new technological invention (the groundbreaking ones) promised to revolutionise society and people’s quality of life for the better, e.g. you’ll work less and won’t have to destroy your back for doing it—shifting from manual labour to intellectual labour, why is that now we are working even without knowing it?
*→ the famous 8h of leisure/8h of work/8h of sleep; the introduction to the general public of the personal computer as a faster tool to get things done, having then more free time and less working hours (but maintaining equally the same wage)*

* Is it this the ultimate solution to keep the capitals flowing? Deception through the morally right and considerate “social services which connects you to your friends and your loved ones”?
*→ Neo-Liberalism? Pure immaterial and emotional non-acknowledged labour?*

* How does the shift from fordism to post-fordism industries and societies fit in all this narrative?
*→ read Post–Fordism and its Discontents*

* Is really work the foundation of one’s life, if he wants to have a life and also being autonomous (e.g. from one’s parents, relatives, friends and ultimately the State—at least in an monetary sense)?

* Is work the substitute of what once upon a time, and for many people still is, God?
*→ read The Last Night by Federico Campagna (for example!)

* What are the alternatives? Are there any? Do not work? Anything else?
*→ look up for Autonomia Operaia*

"La catena di montaggio, la macchina, non finisce mai, non ne esci mai dalla catena di montaggio..."